---
layout: post
title:  "Reflections on Live Code Lab 2019"
date:   2019-04-16 13:20:00 -0500
categories: code csound demo event foxdot hexidecimal live liveCode mcl music python supercollider
postHero: /assets/img/2019/20190203Vortex2_oil.png
event-tag: 20190202MCL
postFooter: A post explaining the latest posting gap is in the works! It has been quite some time since I last posted, and posts I meant to post, like this brief writeup about Live Code Lab, were delayed.
published: true
---
Music Community Lab (MCL) put together a
[write-up](http://monthlymusichackathon.org/post/183904707222/live-code-lab-recap-resources)
of the events of Live Code Lab 2019, back in February.
This is just a brief synopsis of my experience.

## MCL Board Member Activities
As a board member, I was lucky enough to assist with event setup, errand running, check in, and photography.
I also go the chance to chat with volunteers, participants, and Dr. Adam Patrick Bell's research group, visiting from UCalgary.

## Workshops Attended
I often do not get to participate in workshops at MCL events.
This time, my fellow board members ensured that I got to participate!

I did not participate in the presentations at the end,
but have gotten to dabble here and there since the event.
Attending these workshops allowed me to broaden my Csound and python knowledge.

Both workshops started out similarly. We learned how to make a basic beat, added more and more on top of it, and were given pointers describing the different capabilities of each system and hints about how to learn more about both.

I chose to attende these two workshop because my private dabbling in computer music
often uses both Csound and Python.

### Csound: Hexadecimal Beats
[Steven Yi](https://kunstmusik.com), currently a visiting assisting professor at RIT, presented [Hexidecimal Beats](https://github.com/kunstmusik/csound-live-code/blob/master/doc/hexadecimal_beats.md), his system for using hexadecimal notation to code in Csound. Basically, this system allows you to set what four 16th notes are doing with one keystroke. Coupled with the fact that Csound itself allows for highly customizable instruments, this allows for a very customizable live coding experience.

This system lends itself to 4 based meters easily.
Triplets, 32nd notes, and other rhythms can be introduced using lag.

To try this out, go to [live.csound.com](https://live.csound.com).
Steven created a [cheat sheet](https://github.com/kunstmusik/csound-live-code/blob/master/doc/cheatsheet.md) describing useful functions for the Hexadecimal beat system.
He also has a few [tutorials](https://github.com/kunstmusik/csound-live-code/tree/master/doc) and [references](https://github.com/kunstmusik/csound-live-code/blob/master/doc/reference.md) describing how to use Csound live.
If you want to try it yourself, I recommend starting with Tutorial 1,
which, while not specific to the hexadecimal technique,
gives you a lot of background on live.csound.com that you might otherwise be confused about.

While I am excited about getting better at using Csound live with hexadecimal beats,
you need to do some digging in the documents to learn how to do everything.
You can also watch some of Steven's live code sessions for tricks.

I have not yet gotten the hang of doing much that sounds interesting in Csound live,
but have high hopes of doing so in the future. Here is a demo to copy and paste into live.csound.com, which shows you what I can do so far!

#### Csound Live Code / Hexidecimal Beats Demo
Paste the example code into [live.csound.com](https://live.csound.com), paste it over all the code in the browser, highlight everything, and hit `cntrl-e` to run. This is what I can currently do with CsoundLive!

{% highlight csound %}
;; Select this code and press ctrl-e to evaluate
;; reset_clock()
set_tempo(100)
set_scale("maj")

;; callback instrument for csound-live-code
instr P1
  ;--- drums
  ; snare
  hexplay(	"1002",
      		"SD", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 0),
      		fade_in(7, 128) * ampdbfs(-12))
  ; bass drum
  hexplay(	"1111",
      		"BD", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 0),
      		fade_in(8, 128) * ampdbfs(-6))
  ; open high hat
  hexplay("1000",
      "0HH", p3,
      in_scale(-1, 0),
      fade_in(9, 128) * ampdbfs(-5))

    ;--- bass linked
    ; pickup note
  	hexplay("10000000",
      		"Sub5", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 1.5),
      		fade_in(11, 128) * ampdbfs(-12))
    ; first note
	   hexplay("01000000",
      		"Sub5", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 0),
      		fade_in(11, 128) * ampdbfs(-12))
    ; second note
    hexplay(	"00200000",
      		"Sub5", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 1.5),
      		fade_in(11, 128) * ampdbfs(-12))
    ; third note
    hexplay(	"00020000",
      		"Sub5", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 2),
      		fade_in(11, 128) * ampdbfs(-12))
    ; fourth note
	  hexplay("00001000",
      		"Sub5", p3,
      		in_scale(-1, 3.5),
      		fade_in(11, 128) * ampdbfs(-12))

endin

{% endhighlight %}

I was inspired by [Basin Street Blues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M0nMHBFZc_E), and was trying create something similar in Csound Live Code. There is quite a ways to go before this sounds bluesy. Without introducing some sort of lag, I don't think it is possible. If you think otherwise, please, enlighten me! I would love to make this a bit better.

### Python/Supercollider: FoxDot
[David Stein](http://colonelpanix.com), or ColonelPanix in live coding circles,
introduced us to live coding using an environment called [FoxDot](http://foxdot.org).
In FoxDot, we used the Python programming language to control the supercollider music programming language, and ended up out putting sounds.

ColonelPanix has  live coding tutorial and cheat sheet on his website.
Read them!
If you want to know more and are near NY,
the [LiveCodeNYC](http://livecode.nyc) community is very friendly.
It can't hurt to join them and code while learning.

FoxDot with Python draws a lot of inspiration from Python. Data structures are the same.
I have not experimented with if I can use other libraries in conjunction with FoxDot,
but it seems likely that I can.
While the tutorial was run in an outside environment,
I can run FoxDot using my `Atom` editor from inside of a `.py` file.

Follow the directions at FoxDot's [installation](http://foxdot.org/installation/)
page to start up FoxDot. One method of going through the process includes opening SuperCollider, typing `FoxDot.start`, and highlighting the line and hitting `cntrl-Enter` to start up SuperCollider. Then, to start FoxDot, go to the command line, and type `python -m FoxDot`. The FoxDot documents have other methods of startup, as well as many tutorials. 



{% highlight python %}
Clock.bpm = 60
Scale.default.set("major")
# -- Pitches for each phrase
# 1
pphrase1 = P[0, 2, 3, 3.5, 4]
# 2
pphrase2 = P[7, 5.5, 5, 4,  5]
# 3
pphrase3 = P[7, 5.5, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8]
# Ending
pphrase4 = P[7, 5.5, 5, 4, 5, 0, 1, 1.5, 1, 0]

# -- Durations for each phrase
# 1
rphrase1 = P[1, 2/3, 1/3, 1/2, 3/2 ]
# 2
rphrase2 = P[1, 2/3, 1/3, 1/2, 3/2 + 1/3]
# 3
rphrase3 = P[1/3, 2/3, 3/2, 2/3, 1, 2/3, 3/2 + 2/3]
# Ending
rphrase4 = P[1, 2/3, 1/3, 2/3, 1/3, 2/3, 1/3, 1, 2/3, 1/3 + 2]

# -- Melody, plucked guitar
# By intervals, 0 is C, 2 is E, so on ..
s1 >> pluck(    # Pitches
                pphrase1  | pphrase2  | pphrase3  | pphrase4,
                # Durations
                dur = [rphrase1 | rphrase2 | rphrase3 | rphrase4],
                amp = 0.75, # Amplitude
                lpf = 700,  # low and high pass filters: cuts a frequency range
                hpf = 300   #     out for pluck to be heard & not compete
            )

db >> dbass(    # Pitches
                pphrase1  | pphrase2  | pphrase3  | pphrase4,
                # Durations
                dur = rphrase1 | rphrase2 | rphrase3 | rphrase4,
                amp = 0.75 , # Amplitude
                lpf= 300    #double bass is now alone in freq. range
              )

# no rests! not sure how to add them, so just extended notes too long.
s1.stop()

db.stop()


{% endhighlight %}

### CsoundLive vs. FoxDot

## Live Code Lab as Inspiration
